All right. Let's get started again. So welcome back, everyone. The next talk is from Dylan
about eBPF Loader Deep Dive.
Yes. Hello, everyone. Thank you for attending. Before I start, I have to make a quick confession.
I'm only 80% done with my talk. No, but really, today I'm going to talk about eBPF Loaders.
And while I'll do my best to go as deep as I can within the time constraints, there is,
of course, so much more to go through.
So let's start with what is a loader for those of you who are not in the know.
So the term can be used in multiple contexts, but for the purpose of this talk, I will refer
to a loader as any program that interacts with the kernel via syscalls.
Or what you more commonly see is a program that uses eBPF Loader library to do most of
that work for it. So examples of loaders are IP and TC, which can be used to load XDP programs
or TC programs, for example, but also a BPF tool which can do the same or BPF trace or
even your own app if you decide to use a loader library and make something great. Loader libraries
are basically obstructions on the eBPF syscall and to make it easier to use, kind of like
libc but for BPF, which is where the name for the first example comes from, libBPF.
But of course, there are many others like Aya, where we had to talk before this day,
for BCC or eBPF for all examples of loader libraries, libraries that load BPF programs
into the kernel. So why do we need loaders? This is an example, this is the program example
we're working with today. It's quite simple. So if we, on the left side, I declare a map
which we'll be using to store flow data, so packets and bytes per second for a combination
of source address and destination address. On the right is a bit of logic that checks
that we have enough data interpreted as IPv4. Now there's a handle IPv4 function mentioned
here but it doesn't fit on the slides, so we'll get to that later. When I compile my
program, I get what's called an ELF, an executable and linkable format. Or linkable, not that
I think about it. Whatever. If you, a normal C program, if I were to pull any random hello
world C program from the internet, compile it, like I showed in the above command, we'll
get out an executable. And you can use it out of the box, no need for trickery or things.
You make it executable and you execute it and you get hello world on the command line.
If you get an eBPF program and you try to compile it with the commands you found on
the internet, you'll get a relocatable. Now if you try to execute it, you'll get an error.
So it doesn't work. What you need is a loader. The executable that we have is like a premade
IKEA furniture, but the relocatable we get for eBPF is two pieces and perhaps if you're
lucky a guide on how to put them together. And this is the job of the loader, putting
the pieces together and making it and providing the guide to make it easy for you to use it.
Now an elf has regenerated, has the following structure. So we have this large file. We
start with an elf header which contains information like this contains eBPF and it's this many
bits, this machine, and it has a bunch of sections. These sections have names and each
of them can have a different format. So the string type has a bunch of strings. Our programs
have a bunch of program code in them, etc., etc. But those are referred to each other.
So you have all the arrows and they point to each other and they link to each other.
But in this form it's not that usable. Because the kernel only understands syscalls and eBPF
programs it doesn't know how to handle such an elf. So how does the what the BPF syscall
looks like? It's like this if you pull up the mem page. We have a bunch of commands.
Each command has attributes in the kernel defined in a very big union and every command
has its own set of attributes that you can use to instruct the kernel, to ask the kernel
to do something for you. I can't go over all of them because of time constraints but the
most important ones are loading your program, creating a map, loading BPF, and of course
interacting with the map, attaching it somewhere, etc. There are quite a few commands. Each
of them does slightly different things and the loaders in most cases provide functions
that either call multiple of these to do a batch like a big operation, a high level operation,
or they provide small wrappers for you to do your low level operations yourself. There
are also links which is a newer concept and you can pin your objects to the file system
so they live longer than your program. And we have a few other miscellaneous functions
for doing measurements, statistics, iterations, etc. But I can't go in this talk unfortunately.
So back to our program. When we write a program, we have a macro here that says sec. That's
quite unique for BPF. Every BPF program needs to have this section tag there and this tells
the compiler to put all of the program code in the specific section that we named. And
the name of this section is for also convention which can be used by the loader to inform
it that it's an XDP program so it should be interpreted as such. Now we can dump this
section. So if we dump this section with the LLVM object dump, then we get out this which
is hard to read if it's not annotated. But it's a bunch of BPF instructions starting
with the opcode, so the actual opcode that tells it if it's add, subtract, whatever.
Source and destination registers were where these opcodes act on with offsets for jumps.
These are relative. And intermediate data for to say load some data into a register
like a constant value. And sometimes we can use two of them together to represent a 64-bit
number. But we'll get to that later. We can also ask object dump to decompile this for
us and we'll get the decompiled eBPF program. So the bytes on the left side and the actual
program on the right side. But you'll notice that there's a call here. So one thing that
I didn't tell you before is that the handle IPF4 function that we have is marked in such
a way that it won't be in line. So it's a separate program. And BPF can do BPF to BPF
function calls. And if you do that, it puts out this instruction, a function call instruction.
But with minus zero, where do we call to? Well, currently nowhere because we haven't
assembled the pieces of our furniture yet. So what actually what also happens is that
the compiler will emit relocation information, which we can again visualize. And it says,
all right, we have a certain instruction that is given offset. And you should put it in
a relative address of this other function in here. Then we can go to the symbol table
and we can look up this name. And it says, oh, that that function lives in the dot text
section where for a BPF programs, all of the function to function calls, although all of
the functions live together. So we have these two separate pieces of the puzzle. And they
refer to each other. But the kernel only has one pointer for our instructions. It expects
that every program we give it is one contiguous piece of memory with instructions. And it
all should work. So we have some work to do. We need to figure out or the loader rather
needs to figure out how it wants to lay out our program. So piece all of the puzzles together,
find all of these references and then put in the correct correct offsets. All of this
happens in user space before we even go to the to the kernel. Now, second fun thing is
that we can define our map. So again, we have the sec part dot maps, put it in the dot maps
section. And if we and this is the function, this is the part that I have been hiding from
you until now. It's also quite simple in terms of BPF programs. We we get an IP v4 header
check that we are that we can use it. And we write we write or we get a value from the
map. And if it doesn't exist, we write a new one and increment the values every time this
happens to to account for some information. So keep this program in mind. And then if
we go look at the instructions again, the disassembled version this time, we see that
we have two of these long lines which are zero at the end. So these are the 64 bits
intermediate values that I was talking about. And there it is long to keep to pre allocate
room for actual memory addresses later, instead of relative jumps. But there are zero. And
these should be references to our map. And later on, these will become pointers when
the kernel gets gets his way with it. And in our case, we again need to figure out what
to put in here. So same routine, we have relocation information, the relocation information points
to the to the instructions that we that we have, it says you need to put you need to
plug in a flow map here, we go to the we go to the symbol table. And there it says we
have adult map section, and there lives a flow map. In this case, we handle it slightly
differently. So we then have to go load this flow map first, get a file descriptor, which
is our unique identifier for the map. And we need to actually put in that file descriptor
into into these empty, empty values. So the kernel knows where to where to go. Creating
maps also is also a command. So we have to map map create commands, and it takes these
arguments, I cut out a bit of the the later ones. But these are the essentials of type
what how big are my values, etc. Give it a nice name. And there are two ways to define
these. We have the new way of doing it, which are called btf maps, colloquially, on the
left. But there's also the old way of doing it using a BPF map definition on the right.
Don't use it. If you go into lib bpf in the part of the lib bpf, which is used during
a BPF construction, it will warn you that you shouldn't use it and go for the for the
left side. But the old thing is, is that if you use these newer BPF maps on the left,
and you go look at what's actually then written to your dot map section, it's all zero. There's
no information. It still keeps it still allocates room for your map, but it will, but they'll
all be zero. And there's no information. It's all information instead is in the type information
of the flow map. So we have to get in what is btf. BTF stands for BPF type format. It's
derived from dwarf, so the actual dwarf debug symbols that already are used for normal C
programs. But as a way compact or smaller version of it, which only really is concerned
about type information and not about where at which moment a variable lives. And these
are used because eBPF itself is just too limiting and we want to do more, especially in the
verifier. So we have, for example, features like spin locks, which should only be used
on maps that have spin lock values in them. Or we have callback functions so we can define
these BPF functions, but instead give them to a helper function. But this helper needs
to then know that it's the correct number of arguments and the correct type. So all
of this type information we can give to the kernel. And that's why it's for, especially
if you want to use these new fancy features, it's important to use the btf information.
It also allows for flexible map arguments. So for example, if I go back, we have the
definition. And one of the things you'll notice is that we have pinning as an attribute here.
But you will not find it in the syscall attributes. This is purely something that we communicate
to the loader library in this case, that we communicate to the loader library, not just
the BPF, but the name that it has currently. And we can do a lot of different cool things
with that. It also provides debug information for us. So if we go look at loader programs,
it will be annotated with the line information and from which file we can read. And perhaps
one of the coolest features is compile once run everywhere, which allows the loader and
or the kernel to modify our program slightly. So it will run on multiple versions of the
kernel, even if the internals have changed. So if we dump this btf that we have from our
example program, it looks like this. Things, features to note are the numbers on the left
in square brackets. Those are the type ID. Besides it's actual type, so we have pointers,
messages, arrays. You can basically represent every C type in btf this way. There's an optional
name and then there's a lot of information about the specific type. And they refer to
each other. So you'll notice a lot of type ID is something else. So you can also visualize
it by nesting it. I've done this manually. By the way, there's no command that does this.
But this is how you can do it yourself. So we have, for example, a map section with our
flow map in it. And you can see that we have the type, the key, the value. And we have
this very detailed description of exactly how it's structured and which offsets which
things live and the names for it which are used to check all of these certain things.
And also to create the loader, we'll use this to infer the actual value and key sizes to
give to the kernel. This btf is structured in, so it lives in the.btf section. And it's
sort of structured like this. So we have this header, then types and a lot of strings. And
each type starts with the same three fields. So we have a name offset, so an offset into
the strings. We have information and a size or type depending on what the information
says. This translates into the name and the type of the btf information and then the last
part is specific to that type. So encoding for ints or a list of fields for a structure,
et cetera. We also have the.btf.ext, the extended version of it. And this contains
function information, line information and optionally core relocations. So the line information
contains a bunch of lines. So it will annotate this instruction as part of this line of your
original source program and functions to label every one of these btf functions that you
have defined. Loading the btf itself is quite simple. You use the load btf command in the
btf syscall or the btf syscall, give it the blob that we have. It needs to be slightly
changed, especially for the data size, the data section type, but that's more details
to explain exactly why. And a bunch of logging information. Once you have it, we get a file
descriptor of the btf object and of course we have all of these type IDs. So when we
are loading our map again, there are these fields where you can say this is my btf object
which contains all of my types and this is the type of my key, this is the type of my
value. That's how we wire everything together. The same goes for programs. So we give it
the program, the btf the program uses and then we give it these file, these func information
and line information blobs which will make sure that everything is nice and annotated
in the kernel. So we end up with a sort of hierarchy that looks like this. So we start
by loading the btf. We can then load our maps which use it and then once we have our map
file descriptors, we can load our programs after we have of course assembled all of the
pieces of our program. And that all happens, can happen within one call to a loader library.
Now for the last part, the core which I touched on a little bit earlier, like I said compile
ones run everywhere. There's this really good blog post for which I encourage everyone who
wants to use the feature to, which contains information on how to actually use it. But
what it boils down to is there are in lib btf there are these macros to make your life easier
and they boil down to a bunch of compiler built ins. And they're basically questions
to ask the loader just before or the kernel just before or while loading the program.
Like where does, what is the offset of this field? Where does this type even exist? Do
I have this enum value? I have this small program that writes values to or that captures
a certain or the cookie value of a socket when it closes. Not useful at all but it does
help us to illustrate the points. When we, when this macro resolves it looks like this
and the important part to notice here is that we do a helper call and where the arrow starts
we have the socket pointer and we have an offset and we add an offset which we get from
this built in function. This offset is then gets encoded in the 104 that we see here.
This is this offset that we add to the pointer in the actual code. But the compiler will
also emit this relocation which will tell us that this might be a piece of the code
that we want to tweak depending on if the structure changes. So if we again look at
this relocation there unfortunately as far as I'm aware is not a good command line tool
to visualize or to decode this so I decode it one manually. It looks like this so it
says okay instruction number two which is the instruction that we were at. Instruction
number two refers to type ID 18 and it has this accessor string. And this accessor string
is a bunch of numbers which is basically offsets like the field number that it tries to access
so the sockets then the second field would be SK common and then cookie and so forth.
Now this type information that we knew when we created the program is included in the
BTF section but the kernel also has a BTF type for all of its types it has. So we can
do a sort of diff, do a comparison and see that for example fields changed position or
we can't find a certain field and our loader can do this, can resolve this, see it and
then patch our code, change this offset value right before we actually load it which makes
it possible to use it on so many different kernel versions. I'm out of time that's everything
I can offer you for now. Are there any questions and thank you.
Thank you. Any questions? There's one in the back. All right okay. It's difficult now.
Can you pass this on? Hey, thanks for the great talk. So I haven't
dealt that much with BTF but since we have those binaries that we cannot really launch
because we have to load them in another elf, right? At least as I understand. Would it
make any sense to make either a loader that would just work out of the box for those binaries
or like use the bin fm10-misq feature from the kernel to be able to load those BTF elf
files and like use some kind of generic or general interface and just load them and run
them? Yeah, but I think it does make sense to some extent. For example, the IP tool that
I – it doesn't have anything additional so it takes this elf and just loads it as
best as it can and there is probably some way to use the interpreter in the elf itself
just like we do for dynamically loaded executables. As far as I know no one has tried it so far
but I think it could work at least for a limited use case where you don't have to – where
you would only load something and pin it and then allow some other application to actually
work with it afterwards. Thank you. Alright, thanks. We are out of time. If you
have more questions you can find Dylan in the hallway and yeah, thanks again.